# [A neuromechanistic model for rhythmic beat generation](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006450)

[Aricle](https://sinews.siam.org/Details-Page/the-mathematics-of-keeping-a-musical-beat) appeared in SIAM news.

### Key Points

- When you recall a favorite song from your past, you may “hear” it playing in your mind. How is this song stored in your memory, and how can you recall it so quickly years later?
- Our brain’s extraction of a rhythmic pattern is known as beat perception.
- Using tools from mathematical modeling and dynamical systems, we have begun to study how the brain forms an internal metronome, a process we call beat generation. We refer to the neuronal representation of this as a beat generator (BG).
- We recently derived a framework based on biophysical principles for an internal neuronal metronome [7]. We sought to identify basic neuronal mechanisms that may underlie our capacity to learn repeated time intervals, i.e., the ability to judge the length of a single time interval, compare that judgement with prior time intervals, and make necessary corrections to the subsequent interbeat interval. In short, we demonstrated how one could implement error-correction schemes with a network of neurons.
- The framework consists of two main components: a beat generator that learns the frequency and phase of an external sound stimulus, and a gamma count comparator that provides a neuronal mechanism to refine the estimate of repetitive time intervals. 
We suggest ways in which the network makes adjustments to biophysical parameters associated with the BG to meet the following two main criteria: 
  - the BG quickly learns to match a rhythmic external sound stimulus across a range of frequencies (learning a beat), and 
  - the BG maintains that frequency even after the external sound stimulus is removed (keeping the beat).
- We first postulate that counters exist to keep track of the number of such gamma oscillations between important events ([8-9] indicates that count-selective neuronal networks subsist in various contexts).
- Secondly, we postulate that our brains can compare different integer estimates from different gamma counters: our model’s gamma count comparator. If the count between BG spikes is less than the count between metronome tones, then the BG is too fast and a biophysical parameter is adjusted to slow it down. A speed-up signal is offered in the opposite scenario. By tracking the difference in counts, we hypothesize that the brain can adjust the BG frequency to minimize the count difference and thereby estimate a time interval and the phase of stimulus onset events.
- Our model is novel in suggesting how our brains handle errors in beat timing that are smaller than our perceptual ability to discern them. For instance, timing errors may be so small that our brains cannot detect them to make subsequent corrections. From a musical point of view, we thus do not generally keep a perfect beat. We quantify this in our model by saying that the BG is keeping a beat if it produces timing errors that are less than one gamma cycle in time.

### Conclusion

Our work raises several mathematical questions that are centered within dynamical system theory. For example, our model is a hybrid dynamical system that incorporates both continuous time flows—e.g., the membrane potential of a neuron—as well as discrete components, e.g., the integer counts provided by the gamma count comparator. This leads to the study of higher-dimensional hybrid maps for error correction. Because our model tolerates errors within gamma cycle accuracy, the solutions of interest are not necessarily fixed points or periodic orbits. They may or may not be chaotic, and categorizing their specific properties remains an open question. At a much broader scale, it is likely that large sets of neurons from diverse areas of the brain participate in beat generation. Deriving mathematical models for these networks with appropriate, biophysically-based learning rules will be a challenging endeavor. 

With regard to neuroscience, we study how the brain learns repeating sequences in music. Our work raises important questions that we plan to address and hope other researchers will also be compelled to pursue. For instance, how do we form the circuits that represent these sequences in our brain? How do we store these rhythmic memories? Our error-correction approach relies on “learning rules” — perhaps these are special rules that only humans and a few non-human animals possess. How can one ascertain this? Do inabilities for rhythm detection/generation tell us something about neuronal deficits? Music is often used as a treatment for movement-related disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease. Studying the mechanisms responsible for beat generation may help us understand the success of these treatments, as well as the deficits in beat perception and generation in such clinical populations.
